#### Vaccine Adverse Effects: Individual Case Studies
Note: Although these effects are rare, the impression I am getting is that there is still much we don't understand about why these effects are happening, the potential pathological mechanisms involved (although autoimmune responses appear to be a recurring theme), and how bad the situation really is (autopsies were not always possible in many of these case studies).

Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[First case of postmortem study in a patient vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971221003647) | Hansen, T., Titze, U., Kulamadayil-Heidenreich, N.S.A., Glombitza, S., Tebbe, J.J., Röcken, C., Schulz, B., Weise, M. and Wilkens, L., 2021. First case of postmortem study in a patient vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2. _International Journal of Infectious Diseases_, _107_, pp.172-175. | 86-year-old man received first dose of Pfizer vaccine. Autopsy findings "did not observe any characteristic morphological features of COVID-19". However, "By postmortem molecular mapping, we found viral RNA in nearly all organs examined". "These results might suggest that the first vaccination induces immunogenicity but not sterile immunity."
[Cerebral venous thrombosis post BNT162b2 mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccination: A black swan event](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ajh.26272) | Fan, B.E., Shen, J.Y., Lim, X.R., Tu, T.M., Chang, C.C.R., Khin, H.S.W., Koh, J.S., Rao, J.P., Lau, S.L., Tan, G.B. and Chia, Y.W., 2021. Cerebral venous thrombosis post BNT162b2 mRNA SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccination: A black swan event. _American Journal of Hematology_. | Three patients (aged 54, 62, 60 years old) developed Cerebral venous thrombosis 1-9 days after receiving 2 doses of Pfizer vaccine. 
[US Case Reports of Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis With Thrombocytopenia After Ad26.COV2.S Vaccination, March 2 to April 21, 2021](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2779731) | See, I., Su, J.R., Lale, A., Woo, E.J., Guh, A.Y., Shimabukuro, T.T., Streiff, M.B., Rao, A.K., Wheeler, A.P., Beavers, S.F. and Durbin, A.P., 2021. US case reports of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis with thrombocytopenia after Ad26. COV2. S vaccination, March 2 to April 21, 2021. _Jama_. | "In this case series of 12 patients, all were women, younger than 60 years, and had symptom onset ranging from 6 to 15 days after vaccination requiring hospitalization. Of 11 patients with heparin-platelet factor 4 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) antibody test results, all were positive. At last follow-up, outcomes were death (n = 3), intensive care unit (ICU) care (n = 3), non-ICU hospitalization (n = 2), and discharge to home (n = 4)."
[A patient presenting with ARDS after COVID-19 vaccination: A COVID-19 case report](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876034121001532) | Tutak, A.S., Söylemez, F., Konuk, H.B., Çakmak, E., Karakaya, B., Doğan, A., Sayiner, H.S., Aksöz, S. and Alev, M., 2021. A Patient Presenting with ARDS After COVID-19 Vaccination: A COVID-19 Case Report. _Journal of Infection and Public Health_. | 66-year-old male received COVID-19 vaccine (unspecified in paper), 14 days later, experienced shortness of breath and was hospitalised, dying 9 days after hospitalisation. Negative for COVID-19 and other viral/bacterial infections. The patient had high SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibody levels as expected from vaccination, however, somehow he developed COVID-19-induced ARDS in hospital. Authors conclude that "considering that our patient died of ARDS despite the high SARS-CoV-2 IgG level, we suggest that protective measures should be continued even after vaccination, until the pandemic is over."
[Watch out for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder after inactivated virus vaccination for COVID-19](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10072-021-05427-4) | Chen, S., Fan, X.R., He, S., Zhang, J.W. and Li, S.J., 2021. Watch out for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder after inactivated virus vaccination for COVID-19. _Neurological Sciences_, pp.1-3. | Healthy, middle aged female received first dose of inactivated virus vaccine and developed neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) after 2 months. "It is possible that in the context of preexisting systemic immunity, the vaccine overactivated the immune system, exacerbated the production of AQP4-IgG, and eventually provoked NMOSD". 
[Sudden Onset of Myelitis after COVID-19 Vaccination: An Under-Recognized Severe Rare Adverse Event](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3841558) | Fitzsimmons, W. and Nance, C.S., 2021. Sudden Onset of Myelitis after COVID-19 Vaccination: An Under-Recognized Severe Rare Adverse Event. _Available at SSRN 3841558_. | Healthy, 63 year-old male received second dose of Moderna vaccine. 17 hours symptoms of transverse myelitis developed. Patient was treated in hospital for 5 days and then had to do rehabilitation. 25 days later he was able to walk again. "As of 27 April 2021 the FDA VAERS system has 45 reports of transverse myelitis after COVID-19 vaccination (21 after Moderna vaccine, 19 were after Pfizer vaccine, and 5 occurred after Janssen vaccine)."
[Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis-like presentation after an inactivated coronavirus vaccine](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13760-021-01699-x) | Kenangil, G.O., Ari, B.C., Guler, C. and Demir, M.K., 2021. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis-like presentation after an inactivated coronavirus vaccine. _Acta Neurologica Belgica_, pp.1-3. | 46-year-old woman developed Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) after second dose of Sinovac. 
[Management of a patient with a rare congenital limb malformation syndrome after SARS-CoV-2 vaccine-induced thrombosis and thrombocytopenia (VITT)](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/bjh.17619) | Ramdeny, S., Lang, A., Al‐Izzi, S., Hung, A., Anwar, I. and Kumar, P., 2021. Management of a patient with a rare congenital limb malformation syndrome after SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccine‐induced thrombosis and thrombocytopenia (VITT). _British Journal of Haematology_. | 54-year-old man with rare congenital limb malformation received Astrazeneca vaccine, 3 weeks later he developed vaccine-induced thrombosis and thrombocytopenia (VITT). 
[Malignant cerebral infarction, systemic venous thrombosis and thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCov vaccination: a possible catastrophic variant of vaccine induced thrombotic thrombocytopenia](https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-448338/v1) | De Michele, M., Iacobucci, M., Nicolini, E., Chistolini, A., Pulcinelli, F., Cerbelli, B., Merenda, E., Schiavo, O.G., Sbardella, E., Berto, I. and Petraglia, L., 2021. Malignant cerebral infarction, systemic venous thrombosis and thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCov vaccination: a possible catastrophic variant of vaccine induced thrombotic thrombocytopenia. | Two healthy female patients (aged 55 and 57 years old) developed thrombocytopenia, 9 and 7 days respectively after first dose of Astrazeneca vaccine. Patient 1 still hospitalised in critical condition. Patient 2 suffered brain death. 
[Acute Ischemic Stroke Revealing ChAdOx1 nCov-19 Vaccine-Induced Immune Thrombotic Thrombocytopenia: Impact on Recanalization Strategy](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1052305721003451) | Costentin, Guillaume, Ozlem Ozkul-Wermester, Aude Triquenot, Véronique Le Cam-Duchez, Nathalie Massy, Benhamou Ygal, and Evelyne Massardier. "Acute Ischemic Stroke Revealing ChAdOx1 nCov-19 Vaccine-Induced Immune Thrombotic Thrombocytopenia: Impact on Recanalization Strategy." _Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases_ 30, no. 9 (2021): 105942. | Healthy, 26-year-old woman developed VITT after first dose of Astrazeneca vaccine. Authors conclude "Special attention should be paid in patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke (AIS) within three weeks following Covid-19 vaccination". 
[Thrombosis and Thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Vaccination](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2104882) | Schultz, N.H., Sørvoll, I.H., Michelsen, A.E., Munthe, L.A., Lund-Johansen, F., Ahlen, M.T., Wiedmann, M., Aamodt, A.H., Skattør, T.H., Tjønnfjord, G.E. and Holme, P.A., 2021. Thrombosis and thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination. _New England journal of medicine_, _384_(22), pp.2124-2130. | Five healthcare workers (aged 30-50 years old) presented with venous thrombosis and thrombocytopenia 7 to 10 days after receiving the first dose of Astrazeneca vaccine. Four of the patients had major cerebral hemorrhage.
[Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis after ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccination with a misleading first cerebral MRI scan](https://svn.bmj.com/content/early/2021/07/08/svn-2021-001095.abstract) | Ikenberg, B., Demleitner, A.F., Thiele, T., Wiestler, B., Götze, K., Mößmer, G. and Lingor, P., 2021. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis after ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccination with a misleading first cerebral MRI scan. _Stroke and vascular neurology_, pp.svn-2021. | Woman in her 30s developed thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT) and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) 7 days after first dose of Astrazeneca vaccine. 
[Three cases of acute venous thromboembolism in females following vaccination for COVID-19](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213333X21003929?via%3Dihub) | Andraska, E.A., Kulkarni, R., Chaudhary, M. and Sachdev, U., 2021. Three cases of acute venous thromboembolism in females following vaccination for COVID-19. _Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic Disorders_. | Three patients (aged 25, 77, and 84) developed acute venous thromboembolism after Moderna vaccination. None of them were infected with COVID-19. "While risk of thrombosis following infection with COVID-19 is well documented7, 8, 9, the risk of a COVID-19 vaccine is not well known. In recent weeks there has been growing recognition of a potential thrombotic risks following vaccination for COVID-19. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis has been identified following both the Ad26.COV2.S and ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccines2,4,5. Patients with these complications have been found to develop a spontaneous immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia mediated by platelet-activating antibodies against PF4, similar to autoimmune heparin-induced thrombocytopenia."
[Recurrence of Acute Myocarditis Temporally Associated with Receipt of the mRNA Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Vaccine in a Male Adolescent](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8216855/) | Minocha, P.K., Better, D., Singh, R.K. and Hoque, T., Recurrence of Acute Myocarditis Temporally Associated with Receipt of the mRNA Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Vaccine in a Male Adolescent. _The Journal of pediatrics_, pp.S0022-3476. | 17-year-old male developed recurrence of acute myocarditis 48 hours after second dose of Pfizer vaccine. 
[Patients With Acute Myocarditis Following mRNA COVID-19 Vaccination](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamacardiology/article-abstract/2781602) | Kim, H.W., Jenista, E.R., Wendell, D.C., Azevedo, C.F., Campbell, M.J., Darty, S.N., Parker, M.A. and Kim, R.J., 2021. Patients with acute myocarditis following mRNA COVID-19 vaccination. _JAMA cardiology_. | " In this study of 7 patients with acute myocarditis, 4 occurred within 5 days of COVID-19 vaccination between February 1 and April 30, 2021. All 4 patients had received the second dose of a messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine, presented with severe chest pain, had biomarker evidence of myocardial injury, were hospitalized, and had cardiac magnetic resonance imaging findings typical of myocarditis."
[Case of Guillain-Barré syndrome following COVID-19 vaccine](https://casereports.bmj.com/content/14/6/e243629.abstract) | Hasan, T., Khan, M., Khan, F. and Hamza, G., 2021. Case of Guillain-Barré syndrome following COVID-19 vaccine. _BMJ Case Reports CP_, _14_(6), p.e243629. | 62-year-old woman developed GBS 11 days after first dose of Astrazeneca vaccine. 
[Aphasia seven days after second dose of an mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589238X21000292#f0005) | Finsterer, J. and Korn, M., 2021. Aphasia seven days after second dose of an mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. _Brain Hemorrhages_. | "A 52yo male developed sudden-onset reading difficulty and aphasia 7d after the second dose of an mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. He had a previous history of myocardial infarction, arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and nephrolithiasis. Blood pressure was slightly elevated on admission. Blood tests revealed mildly elevated D-dimer, pre-diabetes and hyperuricemia. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed an intracerebral bleeding (ICB) in the left temporal lobe. Aphasia resolved almost completely within a few days."
