Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[Risk of rapid evolutionary escape from biomedical interventions targeting SARS-CoV-2 spike protein](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0250780) | Van Egeren, D., Novokhodko, A., Stoddard, M., Tran, U., Zetter, B., Rogers, M., Pentelute, B.L., Carlson, J.M., Hixon, M., Joseph-McCarthy, D. and Chakravarty, A., 2021. Risk of rapid evolutionary escape from biomedical interventions targeting SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. _PloS one_, _16_(4), p.e0250780. | "Our modeling suggests that SARS-CoV-2 mutants with one or two mildly deleterious mutations are expected to exist in high numbers due to neutral genetic variation, and consequently resistance to vaccines or other prophylactics that rely on one or two antibodies for protection can develop quickly -and repeatedly- under positive selection".
[Evolutionary dynamics of indels in SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein PRE-PRINT](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.30.454557v1?rss=1) | Rao, R.S.P., Ahsan, N., Xu, C., Su, L., Verburgt, J., Fornelli, L., Kihara, D. and Xu, D., 2021. Evolutionary dynamics of indels in SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. _bioRxiv_. | "In this work, we have analysed 1.79 million spike glycoprotein sequences of SARS-CoV-2 and found that the virus is fine-tuning the spike with numerous amino acid insertions and deletions (indels). Indels seem to have a selective advantage as the proportions of sequences with indels were steadily increasing over time, currently at over 89%, with similar trends across countries/variants".
[SARS‐CoV‐2 biology and variants: anticipation of viral evolution and what needs to be done](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8251359/) | Luo, R., Delaunay‐Moisan, A., Timmis, K. and Danchin, A., 2021. SARS‐CoV‐2 biology and variants: anticipation of viral evolution and what needs to be done. _Environ Microbiol._ _23_(5). pp.2339–2363. | "However, vaccines themselves represent a selection pressure for evolution of vaccine‐resistant variants, so the coupling of a policy of permitting high levels of transmission/virus multiplication during vaccine roll‐out with the expectation that vaccines will deal with the pandemic, is unrealistic." Also "In addition to the generic cellular interactions of the virus, there are extensive polymorphisms in humans (e.g. Lewis, HLA, etc.), some distributed within most or all populations, some restricted to specific ethnic populations and these variations pose additional opportunities for/constraints on viral evolution." 
[SARS-CoV-2 Lambda variant exhibits higher infectivity and immune resistance](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.28.454085v1.full) | Kimura, I., Kosugi, Y., Wu, J., Yamasoba, D., Butlertanaka, E.P., Tanaka, Y.L., Liu, Y., Shirakawa, K., Kazuma, Y., Nomura, R. and Horisawa, Y., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 Lambda variant exhibits higher infectivity and immune resistance. _bioRxiv_. | As of late July 2021, the Lambda strain, a new variant detected in South America. It is more infectious due to T76I and L452Q mutations. In addition, "The RSYLTPGD246-253N mutation, a unique 7-amino-acid deletion mutation in the N-terminal domain of the Lambda spike protein, is responsible for evasion from neutralizing antibodies."
[The Lambda variant of SARS-CoV-2 has a better chance than the Delta variant to escape vaccines (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.08.25.457692v1.full) | Liu, H., Wei, P., Zhang, Q., Aviszus, K., Linderberger, J., Yang, J., Liu, J., Chen, Z., Waheed, H., Reynoso, L. and Downey, G., 2021. The Lambda variant of SARS-CoV-2 has a better chance than the Delta variant to escape vaccines. _bioRxiv_. (Posted 26 August 2021) | This pre-print article presents data suggesting that the mutations in the RBD of the Lambda strain may make it more likely to escape vaccine-mediated immunity than the Delta variant. "However, both mutations of F490S and L451Q lead to the disruptions of a hydrophobic patch, which is a critical area for the binding of broadly neutralizing antibodies. This is confirmed by antibody binding assays. The mutated RBD from the Lambda variant decreases the ability to recognize broadly neutralizing antibodies, and this explains why vaccinated people in Peru, who are vaccinated with inactivated viruses, still got infected by this variant".
[Mapping mutations to the SARS-CoV-2 RBD that escape binding by different classes of antibodies](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-24435-8) | Greaney, A.J., Starr, T.N., Barnes, C.O., Weisblum, Y., Schmidt, F., Caskey, M., Gaebler, C., Cho, A., Agudelo, M., Finkin, S. and Wang, Z., 2021. Mapping mutations to the SARS-CoV-2 RBD that escape binding by different classes of antibodies. _Nature communications_, _12_(1), pp.1-14. | This is an interesting paper that proposes a framework by which to track the evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, and the way in which mutations in certain parts of the virus (e.g. the Receptor Binding Domain or RBD) can contribute to evasion from antibody epitopes. This has important implications because the antibodies that are developed after infection with the virus are skewed towards a particular subset of epitopes. This means that if the virus continues to accumulate mutations, then it is possible that it may be able to completely evade much of the current immunity that has been developed. The paper groups the antibody epitopes developed by individuals into 3 classes, and note that currently there are variants that have mutations evading each of the classes, but not all 3 at the same time.  
