## Legal Resources (Australia-focused)

Title | Notes
--- | ---
[COVID-19 Vaccinations and the Workplace Employer Guide](https://www.australianchamber.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Vaccine-Guide-FINAL_190821.pdf) | This is a comprehensive PDF provided by the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. It is aimed at employers wanting to mandate COVID-19 vaccinations and the legal aspects involved. As an employee, the whole thing is worth reading so that one can be aware of their own rights. Some interesting points:<br><br>1) Employers are liable for vaccine adverse effects suffered by employees only if it is a stated "mandate". If it is only a recommendation for the employees to get vaccinated (even if they are providing government information), employers are NOT liable (p.11). This is interesting as some workplaces (like mine) are using careful wording such as a "universal vaccination policy". As the word "mandate" is not specifically used, perhaps this is a way for them to avoid liabilities. <br><br>2) An employer can only legally instate a vaccine mandate if the direction is both lawful and reasonable (p.22-29, checklist on p.33-34).<br><br>3) "Reasonable" refers to a variety of workplace-specific issues including whether one is in contact with people who are vulnerable to the virus or whether other PPE measures may be used. Because this part is specific to each company, it requires a risk assessment to determine whether a mandate can be called "reasonable".<br><br>4) Lawful refers to whether the mandate does not breach the employee's employment contract, as well as any applicable Commonwealth or State/Territory laws. This includes discrimination laws that prohibit "indirect discrimination". Indirect discrimination can refer to groups of people "with particular attributes that are in fact less able to comply with the requirement" for mandatory vaccination. This may include pregnant women, others who are at risk of vaccine adverse effects, younger individuals for whom the vaccine is not authorised, etc.<br><br>5) In regards to "managing employees who refuse to be vaccinated", the guide offers advice to arrange "reasonable accomodation" to such employees, including "alternative duties, wearing a mask at work, keeping a temperature log, and submitting to regular COVID-19 testing". The guide advises employers that requiring employees to work from home may be considered unlawful discrimination, particularly if they have a medical or religious exemption (p.31-32). <br><br>6) "Any vaccination policy should set out a series of graduated steps before an employee is disciplined for refusal to be vaccinated. The starting point would be discussions with the employee aimed at determining the reasons for refusal and obtaining suitable substantiation (details about religious membership and beliefs, health issues or concerns, etc.) There would follow steps of consultation to see whether a mutually satisfactory solution can be reached. Disciplinary action in the form of changed work duties, barring from the office or termination would be resorted to only after those efforts had proved unfruitful." (p.32.)<br><br>7. It is legal for employers to ask to see evidence of an employee's vaccination status. However, as an "employee's vaccination status is considered sensitive health information under the Privacy Act, higher privacy protections will apply to the actual collection of this information from employees." Importantly, the employee's consent is needed if this information will be collected/stored. The exception is if there is a State/Territory Public Health Order that mandates vaccination. In this case, the employee's consent is irrelevant (p.36-37).   
[Fair Work Commission comments on Jennifer Kimber v Sapphire Coast Community Aged Care Ltd](https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/decisionssigned/html/2021fwcfb6015.htm) | In this case, 2 out of 3 of the Fair Work Commission were in favour of dismissing the employee Jennifer Kimber for not wanting to get vaccinated at her workplace. Lyndell Dean, Deputy President of the Australian Fair Work Commission, appealed the decision of the majority. The entire text is worth reading in full, but there are some very reasonable points brought up.<br><br>1) "The stated position of the Australian Government is that the vaccine is voluntary. On 21 July 2021, the Prime Minister in a media conference stated that “people make their own decisions about their own health and their own bodies. That’s why we don’t have mandatory vaccination in relation to the general population”.<br><br>2) Consent is required for all participation in a clinical trial. Consent is necessary because people have a fundamental right to bodily integrity, that being autonomy and self-determination over their own body without unconsented physical intrusion. Voluntary consent for any medical treatment has been a fundamental part of the laws of Australia and internationally for decades. It is legally, ethically and morally wrong to coerce a person to participate in a clinical trial. The requirement for consent in this context is not new and should never be controversial. The Nuremburg Code (the Code), formulated in 1947 in response to Nazi doctors performing medical experiments on people during WWII, is one of the most important documents in the history of the ethics of medical research. Australia’s _National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research_ [23](https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/decisionssigned/html/2021fwcfb6015.htm#P953_124184) confirms that consent is a fundamental requirement for participation in any clinical trial, and that “no person should be subject to coercion or pressure in deciding whether to participate” in a clinical trial. Further, the Australian Government’s _Consumer Guide to Clinical Trials_[24](https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/decisionssigned/html/2021fwcfb6015.htm#P954_124640) also confirms that participation in a clinical trial is voluntary, and states “it is important that you never feel forced to take part in a trial”.<br><br>3) There is nothing controversial in stating that vaccines do not _eliminate_ the risk of COVID, given that those who are vaccinated can catch and transmit COVID. By way of one example, a report issued by the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States on 6 August 2021 [25](https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/decisionssigned/html/2021fwcfb6015.htm#P969_126811) looked at an outbreak of COVID in Massachusetts during July 2021. Of the 469 COVID cases identified, 74% were fully vaccinated. Of this group, 79% were symptomatic. In total, 5 people required hospitalisation and of these, 4 were fully vaccinated. This is not an anomaly – the data from many countries and other parts of the United States provides a similar picture, although obtaining similar data from the United States will now be problematic given the decision by the CDC on 1 May 2021 to cease monitoring and recording breakthrough case information unless the person is hospitalised or dies. What is clear, however, is that the vaccine is not an effective control measure to deal with transmission of COVID by itself.<br><br>4) Critically, there is another alternative to vaccines to assist employers in meeting their WHS obligations, that being testing. Given there is no doubt that those who are fully vaccinated can catch and transmit the virus, testing (whether rapid antigen or otherwise) will provide employers with a level of comfort that a worker does not have COVID and therefore will not transmit COVID to others (that being the risk that is to be managed) in the workplace. Testing is arguably a better control measure compared to vaccines in meeting health and safety obligations.  In short, there is no justifiable basis for employers to mandate COVID vaccinations to meet their health and safety obligations when other options are available to appropriately manage the risk. <br><br>5) Finally, it should be clearly understood that employers who mandate vaccinations will be liable for any adverse reactions their workers may experience, given this is a foreseeable outcome for some people.
[Agreement between the State of Israel and Pfizer](https://govextra.gov.il/media/30806/11221-moh-pfizer-collaboration-agreement-redacted.pdf) | 
