## Natural Immunity vs. Vaccine-induced Immunity

Credit: The majority of these articles were found from a [comprehensive list](https://trialsitenews.com/is-there-evidence-that-natural-exposure-immunity-to-covid-virus-is-similar-or-superior-to-vaccine-induced-immunity-and-should-we-force-mandate-these-vaccines-on-our-healthy-military-and-police/) posted on *TrialSiteNews* by Paul Elias Alexander, PhD, Dr. Ramin Oskoui, MD, and Dr. Peter McCullough, MD.

Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | --- 
[Comparing SARS-CoV-2 natural immunity to vaccine-induced immunity: reinfections versus breakthrough infections (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.08.24.21262415v1) | Gazit, S., Shlezinger, R., Perez, G., Lotan, R., Peretz, A., Ben-Tov, A., Cohen, D., Muhsen, K., Chodick, G. and Patalon, T., 2021. Comparing SARS-CoV-2 natural immunity to vaccine-induced immunity: reinfections versus breakthrough infections. _medRxiv_. (Posted 25 August 2021) | A retrospective observational study in Israel finds that those who have been vaccinated with the Pfizer vaccine have 13-fold increased risk of a breakthrough infection as well as 27-fold risk of symptoms if they do develop a breakthrough infection, compared to those with natural immunity. The implications of this article are so astounding that it has even been covered in the mainstream media, see this [Bloomberg article](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-27/previous-covid-prevents-delta-infection-better-than-pfizer-shot). 
[Discrete immune response signature to SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccination versus infection (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.20.21255677v1) | Ivanova, E., Devlin, J., Buus, T., Koide, A., Cornelius, A., Samanovic, M., Herrera, A., Zhang, C., Desvignes, L., Odum, N. and Ulrich, R., 2021. Discrete immune response signature to SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccination versus infection. | This study uses single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to compare immunological responses from vaccines to natural immunity in terms of individual cell types that are involved. The authors find "our analysis revealed significant qualitative differences between the two types of immune challenges. In COVID-19 patients, immune responses were characterized by a highly augmented interferon response which was largely absent in vaccine recipients."
[Longitudinal analysis shows durable and broad immune memory after SARS-CoV-2 infection with persisting antibody responses and memory B and T cells (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.19.21255739v2) | Cohen, K.W., Linderman, S.L., Moodie, Z., Czartoski, J., Lai, L., Mantus, G., Norwood, C., Nyhoff, L.E., Edara, V.V., Floyd, K. and De Rosa, S.C., 2021. Longitudinal analysis shows durable and broad immune memory after SARS-CoV-2 infection with persisting antibody responses and memory B and T cells. _Medrxiv_. (Posted 18 June 2021) | Longitudinal follow-up of 254 COVID-19 patients who recovered with natural immunity. This paper goes into detail regarding the immune response that has been built in these individuals who now have natural immunity. Antibodies targeted against the spike protein appear to be long-lasting (at least up to 8 months, the duration of the study), and there also appears to be cross-immunity that has developed to SARS-CoV-1 and other betacoronaviruses. "n addition, spike-specific IgG+ memory B cells persist, which bodes well for a rapid antibody response upon virus re-exposure or vaccination. Virus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are polyfunctional and maintained with an estimated half-life of 200 days." The article also makes mention of antibodies targeted to the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2, and how this is important because "CD8+ T cell responses preferentially target the nucleoprotein". They then go on to mention that this is a potential limitation of current vaccines, which only target the spike and do not target other proteins including the nucleoprotein. 
[Differential effects of the second SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine dose on T cell immunity in naïve and COVID-19 recovered individuals (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.22.436441v1) | Camara, C., Lozano-Ojalvo, D., Lopez-Granados, E., Paz-Artal, E., Pion, M., Correa-Rocha, R., Ortiz, A., Lopez-Hoyos, M., Iribarren, M.E., Portoles, J. and Portoles, P., 2021. Differential effects of the second SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine dose on T cell immunity in naïve and COVID-19 recovered individuals. _bioRxiv_. (Posted 22 March 2021) | This study supports that individuals with natural immunity after recovering from COVID-19 may not need any vaccine-mediated immunity: "Here we characterized SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific humoral and cellular immunity in naïve and previously infected individuals during full BNT162b2 vaccination. Our results demonstrate that the second dose increases both the humoral and cellular immunity in naïve individuals. On the contrary, the second BNT162b2 vaccine dose results in a reduction of cellular immunity in COVID-19 recovered individuals, which suggests that a second dose, according to the current standard regimen of vaccination, may be not necessary in individuals previously infected with SARS-CoV-2."
[No Significant Difference in Viral Load Between Vaccinated and Unvaccinated, Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Groups Infected with SARS-CoV-2 Delta Variant (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.09.28.21264262v1) | Acharya CB, Schrom J, Mitchell AM, Coil DA, Marquez C, Rojas S, Wang CY, Liu J, Pilarowski G, Solis L, Georgian E, Petersen M, DeRisi J, Michelmore R, Havlir D (2021) No Significant Difference in Viral Load Between Vaccinated and Unvaccinated, Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Groups Infected with SARS-CoV-2 Delta Variant. _medRxiv_ 2021.09.28.21264262. (Posted 29 September 2021) | This study compared viral load (as estimated through PCR cycle threshold values) in vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals. "We found no significant difference in cycle threshold values between vaccinated and unvaccinated, asymptomatic and symptomatic groups infected with SARS-CoV-2 Delta." This explains why breakthrough cases in the vaccinated are still able to contribute to transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to others. 
[Necessity of COVID-19 vaccination in previously infected individuals (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.01.21258176v3) | Shrestha, N.K., Burke, P.C., Nowacki, A.S., Terpeluk, P. and Gordon, S.M., 2021. Necessity of COVID-19 vaccination in previously infected individuals. _medRxiv_. (Posted 19 June 2021). | “Cumulative incidence of COVID-19 was examined among 52,238 employees in an American healthcare system. The cumulative incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection remained almost zero among previously infected unvaccinated subjects, previously infected subjects who were vaccinated, and previously uninfected subjects who were vaccinated, compared with a steady increase in cumulative incidence among previously uninfected subjects who remained unvaccinated. **Not one of the 1359 previously infected subjects who remained unvaccinated had a SARS-CoV-2 infection over the duration of the study**. Individuals who have had SARS-CoV-2 infection are unlikely to benefit from COVID-19 vaccination…”
[SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell immunity in cases of COVID-19 and SARS, and uninfected controls](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2550-z) | Le Bert, N., Tan, A.T., Kunasegaran, K., Tham, C.Y., Hafezi, M., Chia, A., Chng, M.H.Y., Lin, M., Tan, N., Linster, M. and Chia, W.N., 2020. SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell immunity in cases of COVID-19 and SARS, and uninfected controls. _Nature_, _584_(7821), pp.457-462. (Published 15 Jul 2020). | “Studied T cell responses against the structural (nucleocapsid (N) protein) and non-structural (NSP7 and NSP13 of _ORF1_) regions of SARS-CoV-2 in individuals convalescing from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (_n_ = 36). In all of these individuals, we found CD4 and CD8 T cells that recognized multiple regions of the N protein…showed that patients (_n_ = 23) who recovered from SARS possess long-lasting memory T cells that are reactive to the N protein of SARS-CoV 17 years after the outbreak of SARS in 2003; these T cells displayed robust cross-reactivity to the N protein of SARS-CoV-2.”
[Highly functional virus-specific cellular immune response in asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection](https://rupress.org/jem/article/218/5/e20202617/211835/Highly-functional-virus-specific-cellular-immune) | Le Bert, N., Clapham, H.E., Tan, A.T., Chia, W.N., Tham, C.Y., Lim, J.M., Kunasegaran, K., Tan, L.W.L., Dutertre, C.A., Shankar, N. and Lim, J.M., 2021. Highly functional virus-specific cellular immune response in asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. _Journal of Experimental Medicine_, _218_(5). (Published 1 March 2021). | “Studied SARS-CoV-2–specific T cells in a cohort of asymptomatic (_n_ = 85) and symptomatic (_n_ = 75) COVID-19 patients after seroconversion…thus, asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2–infected individuals are not characterized by weak antiviral immunity; on the contrary, they mount a highly functional virus-specific cellular immune response.”
[Large-scale study of antibody titer decay following BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine or SARS-CoV-2 infection (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.08.19.21262111v1.full)  | Israel, A., Shenhar, Y., Green, I., Merzon, E., Golan-Cohen, A., Schäffer, A.A., Ruppin, E., Vinker, S. and Magen, E., 2021. Large-scale study of antibody titer decay following BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine or SARS-CoV-2 infection. _medRxiv_. (Posted 22 August 2021). | “A total of 2,653 individuals fully vaccinated by two doses of vaccine during the study period and 4,361 convalescent patients were included. Higher SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody titers were observed in vaccinated individuals (median 1581 AU/mL IQR [533.8-5644.6]) after the second vaccination, than in convalescent individuals (median 355.3 AU/mL IQR [141.2-998.7]; p<0.001). In vaccinated subjects, antibody titers decreased by up to 40% each subsequent month while in convalescents they decreased by less than 5% per month…this study demonstrates individuals who received the Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA vaccine have different kinetics of antibody levels compared to patients who had been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, with higher initial levels but a much faster exponential decrease in the first group”.
[SARS-CoV-2 re-infection risk in Austria](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/eci.13520) | Pilz, S., Chakeri, A., Ioannidis, J.P., Richter, L., Theiler‐Schwetz, V., Trummer, C., Krause, R. and Allerberger, F., 2021. SARS‐CoV‐2 re‐infection risk in Austria. _European Journal of Clinical Investigation_, _51_(4), p.e13520. (Published 13 February 2021). | Researchers recorded “40 tentative re-infections in 14, 840 COVID-19 survivors of the first wave (0.27%) and 253 581 infections in 8, 885, 640 individuals of the remaining general population (2.85%) translating into an odds ratio (95% confidence interval) of 0.09 (0.07 to 0.13)…relatively low re-infection rate of SARS-CoV-2 in Austria. Protection against SARS-CoV-2 after natural infection is comparable with the highest available estimates on vaccine efficacies.” Additionally, hospitalization in only five out of 14,840 (0.03%) people and death in one out of 14,840 (0.01%) (tentative re-infection).
[mRNA vaccine-induced T cells respond identically to SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern but differ in longevity and homing properties depending on prior infection status (PRE-PRINT)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888v2) | Neidleman, J., Luo, X., McGregor, M., Xie, G., Murray, V., Greene, W.C., Lee, S.A. and Roan, N.R., 2021. mRNA vaccine-induced T cells respond identically to SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern but differ in longevity and homing properties depending on prior infection status. _eLife_, _10_, p.e72619. (Posted 29 July 2021). | “Spike-specific T cells from convalescent vaccinees differed strikingly from those of infection-naïve vaccinees, with phenotypic features suggesting superior long-term persistence and ability to home to the respiratory tract including the nasopharynx. These results provide reassurance that vaccine-elicited T cells respond robustly to the B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 variants, confirm that convalescents may not need a second vaccine dose.”
[SARS-CoV-2 infection induces long-lived bone marrow plasma cells in humans](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03647-4) | Turner, J.S., Kim, W., Kalaidina, E., Goss, C.W., Rauseo, A.M., Schmitz, A.J., Hansen, L., Haile, A., Klebert, M.K., Pusic, I. and O’Halloran, J.A., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 infection induces long-lived bone marrow plasma cells in humans. _Nature_, pp.1-5. (Published 24 May 2021). | "Here we show that in convalescent individuals who had experienced mild SARS-CoV-2 infections (_n_ = 77), levels of serum anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (S) antibodies declined rapidly in the first 4 months after infection and then more gradually over the following 7 months, remaining detectable at least 11 months after infection. [...] Consistently, circulating resting memory B cells directed against SARS-CoV-2 S were detected in the convalescent individuals. Overall, our results indicate that mild infection with SARS-CoV-2 induces robust antigen-specific, long-lived humoral immune memory in humans."<br><br>See also, news release of this paper in the article, [Good news: Mild COVID-19 induces lasting antibody protection](https://medicine.wustl.edu/news/good-news-mild-covid-19-induces-lasting-antibody-protection/).
[Robust neutralizing antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 infection persist for months](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abd7728) | Wajnberg, A., Amanat, F., Firpo, A., Altman, D.R., Bailey, M.J., Mansour, M., McMahon, M., Meade, P., Mendu, D.R., Muellers, K. and Stadlbauer, D., 2020. Robust neutralizing antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 infection persist for months. _Science_, _370_(6521), pp.1227-1230. (Published 4 December 2020). | “Neutralizing antibody titers against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein persisted for at least 5 months after infection. Although continued monitoring of this cohort will be needed to confirm the longevity and potency of this response, these preliminary results suggest that the chance of reinfection may be lower than is currently feared.”
[Evolution of Antibody Immunity to SARS-CoV-2](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.11.03.367391v2) | Gaebler, C., Wang, Z., Lorenzi, J.C., Muecksch, F., Finkin, S., Tokuyama, M., Cho, A., Jankovic, M., Schaefer-Babajew, D., Oliveira, T.Y. and Cipolla, M., 2021. Evolution of antibody immunity to SARS-CoV-2. _Nature_, _591_(7851), pp.639-644. (Posted 4 January 2021). | “Concurrently, neutralizing activity in plasma decreases by five-fold in pseudo-type virus assays. In contrast, the number of RBD-specific memory B cells is unchanged. Memory B cells display clonal turnover after 6.2 months, and the antibodies they express have greater somatic hypermutation, increased potency and resistance to RBD mutations, indicative of continued evolution of the humoral response…we conclude that the memory B cell response to SARS-CoV-2 evolves between 1.3 and 6.2 months after infection in a manner that is consistent with antigen persistence.”
[Persistence of neutralizing antibodies a year after SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/eji.202149535) | Haveri, A., Ekström, N., Solastie, A., Virta, C., Österlund, P., Isosaari, E., Nohynek, H., Palmu, A.A. and Melin, M., 2021. Persistence of neutralizing antibodies a year after SARS‐CoV‐2 infection in humans. _European Journal of Immunology_. (Published 27 September 2021). | “Assessed the persistence of serum antibodies following WT SARS-CoV-2 infection at 8 and 13 months after diagnosis in 367 individuals…found that NAb against the WT virus persisted in 89% and S-IgG in 97% of subjects for at least 13 months after infection.” 
[Quantifying the risk of SARS‐CoV‐2 reinfection over time](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8209951/pdf/RMV-9999-e2260.pdf) | O Murchu, E., Byrne, P., Carty, P.G., De Gascun, C., Keogan, M., O’Neill, M., Harrington, P. and Ryan, M., 2021. Quantifying the risk of SARS‐CoV‐2 reinfection over time. _Reviews in medical virology_, p.e2260. (Published 18 May 2021). | “Eleven large cohort studies were identified that estimated the risk of SARS‐CoV‐2 reinfection over time, including three that enrolled healthcare workers and two that enrolled residents and staff of elderly care homes. Across studies, the total number of PCR‐positive or antibody‐positive participants at baseline was 615,777, and the maximum duration of follow‐up was more than 10 months in three studies. Reinfection was an uncommon event (absolute rate 0%–1.1%), with no study reporting an increase in the risk of reinfection over time.”
[Natural immunity to covid is powerful. Policymakers seem afraid to say so](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2021/09/15/natural-immunity-vaccine-mandate/) | *Washington Post*. 15 September 2021. | Washington Post coverage of natural immunity:<br><br>Makary writes “it’s okay to have an incorrect scientific hypothesis. But when new data proves it wrong, you have to adapt. Unfortunately, many elected leaders and public health officials have held on far too long to the hypothesis that natural immunity offers unreliable protection against covid-19 — a contention that is being rapidly debunked by science. More than 15 studies have demonstrated the [power of immunity](https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-power-of-natural-immunity-11623171303) acquired by previously having the virus. A 700,000-person [study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.08.24.21262415v1) from Israel two weeks ago found that those who had experienced prior infections [](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2021/09/15/natural-immunity-vaccine-mandate/#_msocom_4) were 27 times less likely to get a second symptomatic covid infection than those who were vaccinated. This affirmed a June Cleveland Clinic [study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.01.21258176v3) of health-care workers (who are often exposed to the virus), in which none [](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2021/09/15/natural-immunity-vaccine-mandate/#_msocom_6) who had previously tested positive for the [coronavirus](https://www.washingtonpost.com/coronavirus/?itid=lk_inline_manual_5) got reinfected. The study authors concluded that “individuals who have had SARS-CoV-2 infection are unlikely to benefit from covid-19 vaccination.” And in May, a Washington University [study](https://medicine.wustl.edu/news/good-news-mild-covid-19-induces-lasting-antibody-protection/) found that even a mild covid infection resulted in long-lasting immunity.”
[SARS-CoV-2 elicits robust adaptive immune responses regardless of disease severity](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(21)00203-6/fulltext) | Nielsen, S.S., Vibholm, L.K., Monrad, I., Olesen, R., Frattari, G.S., Pahus, M.H., Højen, J.F., Gunst, J.D., Erikstrup, C., Holleufer, A. and Hartmann, R., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 elicits robust adaptive immune responses regardless of disease severity. _EBioMedicine_, _68_, p.103410. (Published 4 June 2021). | “203 recovered SARS-CoV-2 infected patients in Denmark between April 3rd and July 9th 2020, at least 14 days after COVID-19 symptom recovery… report broad serological profiles within the cohort, detecting antibody binding to other human coronaviruses… the viral surface spike protein was identified as the dominant target for both neutralizing antibodies and CD8+ T-cell responses. Overall, the majority of patients had robust adaptive immune responses, regardless of their disease severity.”
[Protection of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection is similar to that of BNT162b2 vaccine protection: A three-month nationwide experience from Israel](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.20.21255670v1) | Goldberg, Y., Mandel, M., Woodbridge, Y., Fluss, R., Novikov, I., Yaari, R., Ziv, A., Freedman, L. and Huppert, A., 2021. Protection of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection is similar to that of BNT162b2 vaccine protection: A three-month nationwide experience from Israel. _medRxiv_. (Posted 24 April 2021). | “Analyze an updated individual-level database of the entire population of Israel to assess the protection efficacy of both prior infection and vaccination in preventing subsequent SARS-CoV-2 infection, hospitalization with COVID-19, severe disease, and death due to COVID-19… vaccination was highly effective with overall estimated efficacy for documented infection of 92·8% (CI:[92·6, 93·0]); hospitalization 94·2% (CI:[93·6, 94·7]); severe illness 94·4% (CI:[93·6, 95·0]); and death 93·7% (CI:[92·5, 94·7]). Similarly, the overall estimated level of protection from prior SARS-CoV-2 infection for documented infection is 94·8% (CI: [94·4, 95·1]); hospitalization 94·1% (CI: [91·9, 95·7]); and severe illness 96·4% (CI: [92·5, 98·3])…results question the need to vaccinate previously-infected individuals.”
