## Politics in Medicine

Title | Notes
--- | ---
[Corporate Medicine](https://im1776.com/2021/10/08/corporate-medicine/) | A US-based practicing physician speaks anonymously about his experiences seeing the increasing political influence in medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic:<br><br>"Even the most cynical citizens prior to COVID-19 did not think individual medical doctors would change practice based on politics. It turns out, however, that medical practitioners will literally subordinate patient health to sociopolitical goals. From our “healthcare heroes” on their social media platforms comes “guns are a public health problem,” fat acceptance (obesity is racist), silencing of the debate on transgender surgery for children, and drugs with (R) and (D) political affiliations (aka ivermectin and Remdesivir). Unfortunately, you can’t just ‘listen to your doctor’ anymore without skepticism, same as you would listen to Don Lemon or Rachel Maddow. Just as the Cathedral’s edicts trickle down to the Corporate Media and then the blue checks on Twitter, its medical edicts filter down to healthcare organizations and physicians."<br><br> "As for vaccine injuries, I have not seen a single colleague reporting to VAERS, despite numerous patients with myocarditis, blood clots, and major neurologic issues. Yet there is no official edict or policy to whitewash vaccine injuries. In the Cathedral there doesn’t need to be direct coordination. My colleagues just know to dismiss the side effects of COVID vaccines, just as lemmings know to keep running off the cliff."<br><br>"Many healthcare providers are now practicing medicine according to what is said on _MSNBC_ and Twitter rather than using critical thinking. As a physician myself, I deliberately ignored the greater evils and had blinders on the thought patterns (or lack thereof) of many of my colleagues. That changed one day in early 2020 when I showed up to work wearing a self-purchased N95 mask. On balance I thought it seemed prudent to take precautions against an unknown and mysterious respiratory virus. Yet I was the only one wearing a mask out of thousands of hospital employees. In two hours I was threatened with job termination because my appearance was “distressing,” and told that if I was wearing a mask then “others will want one too.” That was my wake-up call — management would rather that me (and my family) get sick than sacrifice appearances."
[AHPRA Position Statement]([https://www.ahpra.gov.au/documents/default.aspx?record=WD21%2F30751&dbid=AP&chksum=zrOQ56xJaaLbasNxLDyqMA%3D%3D&TSPD_101_R0=08c403b005ab2000762c6494c4afaeef3e0b400a75a3ae75a3b23ff4bd293ecf302867c5568a0f610871432fbc1430005d979400c652fa06bef674ebfe80703c79a6ddb8701d7d9db431958015b98c7c66603db5b8f3210e50dbcb2a03bd6311](https://www.ahpra.gov.au/documents/default.aspx?record=WD21%2F30751&dbid=AP&chksum=zrOQ56xJaaLbasNxLDyqMA%3D%3D&TSPD_101_R0=08c403b005ab2000762c6494c4afaeef3e0b400a75a3ae75a3b23ff4bd293ecf302867c5568a0f610871432fbc1430005d979400c652fa06bef674ebfe80703c79a6ddb8701d7d9db431958015b98c7c66603db5b8f3210e50dbcb2a03bd6311)) (Archived PDF: [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/17_oPklsQdPRR29HqPoJpTge1fe78StLa/view?usp=sharing)) | This is a statement by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency that outlines the accepted behaviour for medical professionals including doctors and nurses in Australia. Indeed, according to guidelines, Australian medical professionals will be subjected to “investigation” or “regulatory action” if they say anything that contradicts what health authorities deem the “scientific evidence”. This essentially implies that the direct experience/expertise of doctors is being ignored, as well as their medical judgement when reviewing the research literature. Only The Science from health authorities like AHPRA can be considered The Truth. <br><br>Doctors are allowed to refuse COVID-19 vaccines for themselves if they have a conscientious objection. However, they must still recommend them to their patients:<br><br> “In addition to the above, it is important that practitioners inform their patient or client of their conscientious objection where relevant to the patient or client’s treatment or care. In informing their patient or client of a conscientious objection to COVID-19 vaccination, practitioners must be careful not to discourage their patient or client from seeking vaccination. Practitioners authorised to prescribe and/or administer the vaccine but who have a conscientious objection must ensure appropriate referral options are provided for vaccination." <br><br>"While some health practitioners may have a conscientious objection to COVID-19 vaccination, all practitioners, including students on placement, must comply with local employer, health service or health department policies, procedures and guidelines relating to COVID-19 vaccination. Any queries about these should be directed towards the individual employer, health service, state or territory health department and/or education provider for registered students. National Boards regulate individual practitioners and not health services or state and territory health departments. Queries about COVID-19 vaccination programs should be directed to the Commonwealth, state and territory governments which are responsible for these programs.”<br><br>"Any promotion of anti-vaccination statements or health advice which contradicts the best available scientific evidence or seeks to actively undermine the national immunisation campaign (including via social media) is not supported by National Boards and may be in breach of the codes of conduct and subject to investigation and possible regulatory action".
[Supporting Dr Paul Oosterhuis](https://doctors4covidethics.org/supporting-dr-oosterhuis/) | "Dr. Paul Oosterhuis is an Australian anaesthetist with over thirty years experience, including in critical care and resuscitation. He has been brought before the Medical Board of NSW for posting information on social media regarding COVID-19. His posts related to early treatment and prophylaxis, PCR tests, and risk-benefit calculations regarding COVID-19 vaccination and lockdowns".<br><br>Dr Paul Oosterhuis is an example of what happens to a medical professional when they breach the guidelines set out in the AHPRA policy statement. Two social media posts that were backed by evidence, were considered to breach those guidelines, and his medical license was suspended as a result. <br><br>"In the social media posts for which my registration was suspended, I discussed issues such as early treatment and prophylaxis against COVID-19, evidence for government measures such as lockdowns and PCR tests, and evidence regarding risk-benefit analyses of COVID-19 vaccines. I provided a link to a presentation by Dr Paul Marik on prophylaxis in support of the post, highlighting a chart of vitamin D versus risk of COVID from Dr Marik’s presentation, to illuminate the low hanging fruit of prophylaxis."<br><br>"In other posts I questioned the evidence base for the government’s policies of lockdowns and mask mandates, and pointed out that there is evidence of vaccines having low effectiveness and real risks and harms (which are being suppressed), along with harms from the totalitarian lockdowns causing massive damage society-wide."<br><br>"The risk of Antibody Dependent enhancement of disease, predicted by Dr Geert Vanden Bossche, driven by immune escape from the selective evolutionary pressure of vaccinating with a non sterilising agent is a real and present danger and needs to be discussed. The danger to millions is distressing to me, and discussing that danger is, I believe, unarguably in the public interest."<br><br>"Early in 2020, I was active in criticising my medical administrators for failure to prepare for an outbreak such as COVID-19 when it was apparent that PPE was being rationed (P95’s were in short supply). I urged my colleagues to perform quantitative fit testing of our available P95 masks in early 2020 during which we found a surprising number of staff failed quantitative fit testing with the hospital issued PPE. This was something I had hypothesised after looking at the number of healthcare workers in Northern Italy catching the disease."<br><br>"Over the last 18 months I have been increasingly concerned about the misinformation and censorship creeping into science and medicine. Fellow physicians were saving lives with early treatment and medication/supplement  approaches to prevention but it was THIS  that was attacked and censored! People like Dr Paul Marik, Dr Pierre Kory of the FLCCC Alliance, Dr Robert Malone, Dr Geert Vanden Bossche, Dr Michael Yeadon, Dr Vlad Zelenko, Dr Chris Martensen, Dr Eric Weinstein and others are making credible and serious warnings about the gene therapy being coerced upon our populations. Censoring their work, and the research of experts like Dr Tess Lawrie, Dr Peter McCullough, Dr Sucharit Bhakdi and America’s Frontline Doctors is dangerous."<br><br>"The Medical Board of NSW is now using intimidation, threatening and gagging doctors like myself, who share data which questions the official narrative. I don’t believe that censorship is compatible with good science and good medicine, and I believe that it needs to stop now, in the name of public health and public interest."

## Vaccine Mandates

[Open Letter from Dr Byram Bridle, PhD, Associate Professor of Viral Immunology to the University of Guelph about vaccine mandates](https://www.jccf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/2021.09.17-Open-letter-to-the-president-of-the-U-of-Guelph_B.Bridle.pdf) | 17 September 2021. | 
