## Pre-Existing Immunity
Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[Covid-19: Do many people have pre-existing immunity?](https://www.bmj.com/content/370/bmj.m3563) | Doshi, P., 2020. Covid-19: Do many people have pre-existing immunity?. _Bmj_, _370_. | This is a short commentary article by Senior Editor Peter Doshi of *The BMJ*. Doshi refers to a number of studies suggesting that pre-existing immunity to SARS-CoV-2 may exist in the population, although the exact proportion is unclear at this stage. Apparently, "at least six studies have reported T cell reactivity against SARS-CoV-2 in 20% to 50% of people with no known exposure to the virus." Although these studies are small and do not provide precise estimates of the numbers of people with pre-existig immunity, "they are hard to dismiss, with several being published in _Cell_ and _Nature_. Alessandro Sette, an immunologist from La Jolla Institute for Immunology in California and an author of several of the studies, told _The BMJ_, “At this point there are a number of studies that are seeing this reactivity in different continents, different labs. As a scientist you know that is a hallmark of something that has a very strong footing.”" Interestingly, this phenomenon appears to have happened during the H1N1 Swine Flu pandemic in 2009, where it was found that people had B and T cell pre-existing immunity, which was why the Swine Flu was causing less severe infections than was expected. I need to go through the articles cited here in detail, but an important question that this commentary raises is - to what extent is pre-existing immunity relevant to the COVID-19 pandemic? Is this why the severity of infection appears much less in places like Sweden, where they may have higher levels of pre-existing immunity? How can pre-existing immunity be obtained and who is predisposed to having it?
[Humoral immune responses against seasonal coronaviruses predict efficiency of SARS-CoV-2 spike targeting, FcγR activation, and corresponding COVID-19 disease severity](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.09.14.460338v1) | Garrido JJ, Medina M, Bravo F, McGee S, Fuentes F, Calvo M, Bowman JW, Bahl CD, Barria MI, Brachman RA, Alvarez RA (2021) Humoral immune responses against seasonal coronaviruses predict efficiency of SARS-CoV-2 spike targeting, FcγR activation, and corresponding COVID-19 disease severity. _bioRxiv_ 2021.09.14.460338. (Posted 16 September 2021) | -

