 Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Impairs Endothelial Function via Downregulation of ACE 2](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318902) | Lei, Y., Zhang, J., Schiavon, C.R., He, M., Chen, L., Shen, H., Zhang, Y., Yin, Q., Cho, Y., Andrade, L. and Shadel, G.S., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Impairs Endothelial Function via Downregulation of ACE 2. _Circulation research_, _128_(9), pp.1323-1326. | The implications of this article are startling - if true, then spike proteins have the potential to cause damage by themselves, even when they are not associated with a virus. In this study, the researchers create a “pseudovirus” that was surrounded by SARS-CoV-2 classic crown of spike proteins, but did not contain any actual virus. Exposure to this pseudovirus resulted in damage to the lungs and arteries of an animal model—proving that the spike protein alone appears enough to cause disease. Tissue samples showed inflammation in endothelial cells lining the pulmonary artery walls. Apparently previous studies have shown a similar effect when cells were exposed to the whole SARS-CoV-2 virus, but this study shows that only the Spike protein is neccessary to cause this damage. Also see commentary/summary at [SciTechDaily](https://scitechdaily.com/covid-19-is-a-vascular-disease-coronavirus-spike-protein-attacks-vascular-system-on-a-cellular-level/). 
[SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Elicits Cell Signaling in Human Host Cells: Implications for Possible Consequences of COVID-19 Vaccines](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7827936/) | Suzuki, Y.J. and Gychka, S.G., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 spike protein elicits cell signaling in human host cells: Implications for possible consequences of COVID-19 vaccines. _Vaccines_, _9_(1), p.36. | "We will need to monitor carefully the long-term consequences of COVID-19 vaccines that introduce the spike protein into the human body. Furthermore, while human data on the possible long-term consequences of spike protein-based COVID-19 vaccines will not be available soon, it is imperative that appropriate experimental animal models are employed as soon as possible to ensure that the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein does not elicit any signs of the pathogenesis of PAH or any other chronic pathological conditions."
[SARS-CoV-2 spike protein interactions with amyloidogenic proteins: Potential clues to neurodegeneration](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006291X2100499X) | Idrees, D. and Kumar, V., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 spike protein interactions with amyloidogenic proteins: Potential clues to neurodegeneration. _Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications_, _554_, pp.94-98. | "SARS-CoV-2 Spike S1 protein receptor binding domain (SARS-CoV-2 S1 RBD) binds to heparin and heparin binding proteins. Heparin binding accelerates the aggregation of the pathological amyloid proteins present in the brain. Heparin-binding site on the S1 might assist the binding of amyloid proteins to the viral surface and thus could leads to neurodegeneration in brain."
["Vaccine-Induced Covid-19 Mimicry" Syndrome: Splice reactions within the SARS-CoV-2 Spike open reading frame result in Spike protein variants that may cause thromboembolic events in patients immunized with vector-based vaccines - PRE-PRINT](https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-558954/v1) | Kowarz, E., Krutzke, L., Reis, J., Bracharz, S., Kochanek, S. and Marschalek, R., 2021. “Vaccine-Induced Covid-19 Mimicry” Syndrome: Splice reactions within the SARS-CoV-2 Spike open reading frame result in Spike protein variants that may cause thromboembolic events in patients immunized with vector-based vaccines. | "Unfortunately, severe side effects became overt during these vaccination campaigns: cerebral venous sinus thromboses (CVST), absolutely rare under normal life conditions, were found as a severe side effect that occured 4-14 days after first vaccinations. Besides CVST, Splanchnic Vein Thrombosis (SVT) was also observed. This type of adverse event has not been observed in the clinical studies of AstraZeneca, and therefore led immediately to a halt in vaccinations in several european countries (...) Here, we present data that may explain these severe side effects which have been attributed to adenoviral vaccines. According to our results, transcription of wildtype and codon-optimized Spike open reading frames enables alternative splice events that lead to C-terminal truncated, soluble Spike protein variants. These soluble Spike variants may initiate severe side effects when binding to ACE2-expressing endothelial cells in blood vessels."
[An insight into neurotoxic and toxicity of spike fragments SARS-CoV-2 by exposure environment: A threat to aquatic health?](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.01.11.425914v1) | Charlie-Silva, I., Araujo, A., Guimaraes, A., Veras, F., Braz, H., Pontes, L., Jorge, R., Belo, M., Fernandes, B., Nobrega, R.H. and Galdino, G., 2021. An insight into neurotoxic and toxicity of spike fragments SARS-CoV-2 by exposure environment: A threat to aquatic health?. _bioRxiv_. | "In both concentrations, PSPD2002 and PSPD2003 increased catalase and superoxide dismutase antioxidants enzymes activities, as well as oxidative stress (nitrite levels, hydrogen peroxide and reactive oxygen species). All three peptides also increased acetylcholinesterase activity in the highest concentration. These peptides showed molecular interactions in silico with acetylcholinesterase and antioxidant enzymes. Aquatic particle contamination of SARS-CoV-2 has neurotoxics effects in P. cuvieri tadpoles. These findings indicate that the COVID-19 can constitute environmental impact or biological damage potential."
[Long-lived macrophage reprogramming drives spike protein-mediated inflammasome activation in COVID-19](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/emmm.202114150) | Theobald, S.J., Simonis, A., Georgomanolis, T., Kreer, C., Zehner, M., Eisfeld, H.S., Albert, M.C., Chhen, J., Motameny, S., Erger, F. and Fischer, J., 2021. Long‐lived macrophage reprogramming drives spike protein‐mediated inflammasome activation in COVID‐19. _EMBO Molecular Medicine_, p.e14150. | "Here we show that the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (S-protein) primes inflammasome formation and release of mature interleukin-1β (IL-1β) in macrophages derived from COVID-19 patients but not in macrophages from healthy SARS-CoV-2 naïve individuals."

