## COVID-19 Vaccine General Concerns
Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ----------
[The Safety of COVID-19 Vaccinations - Should We Rethink the Policy?](https://cf5e727d-d02d-4d71-89ff-9fe2d3ad957f.filesusr.com/ugd/adf864_8c97b2396c2842b3b05975bfbd8254cb.pdf) | Harald Walach, Rainer J. Klement, and Wouter Aukema. 2021. [The Safety of COVID-19 Vaccinations - Should We Rethink the Policy?](https://cf5e727d-d02d-4d71-89ff-9fe2d3ad957f.filesusr.com/ugd/adf864_8c97b2396c2842b3b05975bfbd8254cb.pdf) Sci, Publ Health Pol & Law 3:87-99. (Newly and Independently Peer-Reviewed (Single-Blind, 3 Reviewers) | This is an analysis that evaluates the risk-benefit of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines using a measure called the Number Needed to Vaccinate (NNTV) in order to prevent one COVID-19 case or death. The data is from the Adverse Drug Reactions database of the Dutch National Register. The authors found that "The NNTV is between 200 and 700 to prevent one case of COVID-19 for the mRNA vaccine marketed by Pfizer. NNTV to prevent one death is between 9,000 and 100,000 (95% confidence interval)". In addition, "Among those, there were 16 serious ICSRs (Individual Case Safety Reports), and the number of ICSRs reporting fatal side-effects was at 4.11/100,000 vaccinations. Thus, for 6 (95% CI 2–11) deaths prevented by vaccination, there were approximately 4 deaths reported to Dutch Lareb that occurred after vaccination, yielding a potential risk/benefit ratio of 2:3".
[Vaccine- and natural infection-induced mechanisms that could modulate vaccine safety](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214750020304248#bib0640) | Kostoff, R.N., Kanduc, D., Porter, A.L., Shoenfeld, Y., Calina, D., Briggs, M.B., Spandidos, D.A. and Tsatsakis, A., 2020. Vaccine-and natural infection-induced mechanisms that could modulate vaccine safety. _Toxicology Reports_. | A must-read. Comprehensive paper that goes through potential mid- and long-term issues from the rushed development of the vaccines, including ADE, Vaccine-associated Virus Interference, Immune Evasion etc. 16 different concerns/risks are mentioned. Since this article was published, there has already been evidence that ADE may be occurring. It will be interesting to refer back to this to see what other risks/concerns brought up may start to appear. 
[SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccines are not free of neurological side effects](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8206845/) | Finsterer, J. and Scorza, F.A., 2021. SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccines are not free of neurological side effects. _Acta Neurologica Scandinavica_, _144_(1), p.109. | "The rareness of reports about neurological side effects of SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccines may have several reasons. First, SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccines are available only since December 2020, why it may be simply too early to have got these cases published. Secondly, there may be a psychological inhibition to recognize and report side effects, as we all want to get rid of the global threat caused by the virus and want to return to normal life. Third, those who produce the vaccines and want to make money with their products may have a weak interest in hearing about side effects of their products why they may directly or indirectly try to avoid publications about putative adverse reactions. Fourth, there is enormous social, economic and political pressure on producers of vaccines and publishers of meeting current needs and providing an effective weapon against the pandemic, why positive reports are preferred over negative news about the handling of the global crisis".
[Review Article: Safety of COVID-19 vaccines administered in the EU: Should we be concerned?](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8055532/) | Hernández, A.F., Calina, D., Poulas, K., Docea, A.O. and Tsatsakis, A.M., 2021. Safety of COVID-19 vaccines administered in the EU: Should we be concerned?. _Toxicology Reports_, _8_, pp.871-879. | "Data on long-term studies, interaction with other vaccines, use in pregnancy/breast-feeding, use in immunocompromised subjects, and in subjects with comorbidities, autoimmune or inflammatory disorders are still missing for these vaccines. Therefore, careful follow-up and surveillance studies for continued vaccine safety monitoring will be needed to ascertain the potential risks of such adverse events or diseases." 
[Informed consent disclosure to vaccine trial subjects of risk of COVID‐19 vaccines worsening clinical disease](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7645850/) | Cardozo, T. and Veazey, R., 2021. Informed consent disclosure to vaccine trial subjects of risk of COVID‐19 vaccines worsening clinical disease. _International journal of clinical practice_, _75_(3), p.e13795. | "COVID‐19 vaccines designed to elicit neutralising antibodies may sensitise vaccine recipients to more severe disease than if they were not vaccinated. Vaccines for SARS, MERS and RSV have never been approved, and the data generated in the development and testing of these vaccines suggest a serious mechanistic concern: that vaccines designed empirically using the traditional approach (consisting of the unmodified or minimally modified coronavirus viral spike to elicit neutralising antibodies), be they composed of protein, viral vector, DNA or RNA and irrespective of delivery method, may worsen COVID‐19 disease via antibody‐dependent enhancement (ADE). This risk is sufficiently obscured in clinical trial protocols and consent forms for ongoing COVID‐19 vaccine trials that adequate patient comprehension of this risk is unlikely to occur, obviating truly informed consent by subjects in these trials."
[Review Article: Why are we vaccinating children against COVID-19?](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221475002100161X) | Kostoff, R.N., Calina, D., Kanduc, D., Briggs, M.B., Vlachoyiannopoulos, P., Svistunov, A.A. and Tsatsakis, A., 2021. Why are We Vaccinating Children against COVID-19?. _Toxicology Reports_. (Published 14 September 2021) | This important review article discusses issues relating to vaccination of children with SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. The authors make the case that this is unecessary, as COVID-19 is a disease that mainly affects the elderly, and that children have a negligible risk from the disease. They point out issues with the way that clinical trials by Pfizer were carried out. These trials did not measure specific biomarkers known to be associated with pathology caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus, including "d-dimers for evidence of enhanced coagulation/clotting; CRP for evidence of enhanced inflammation; [troponins](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/pharmacology-toxicology-and-pharmaceutical-science/troponin "Learn more about troponins from ScienceDirect's AI-generated Topic Pages") for evidence of cardiac damage; [occludin](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/pharmacology-toxicology-and-pharmaceutical-science/occludin "Learn more about occludin from ScienceDirect's AI-generated Topic Pages") and [claudin](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/pharmacology-toxicology-and-pharmaceutical-science/claudin "Learn more about claudin from ScienceDirect's AI-generated Topic Pages") for evidence of enhanced barrier permeability; blood oxygen levels for evidence of enhanced hypoxia; amyloid-beta and phosphorylated tau for evidence of increased predisposition to Alzheimer’s disease". They raise an important safety concern of the trials, in which subclinical effects were not even looked for - only symptom level adverse effects were noted: "Most importantly, these types of measurements would have shown changes in the host that did not reach the symptom level of expression but raised the general level of host abnormality that could predispose the host to a higher probability of serious symptoms and diseases at some point in the future." The authors then go on to summarise the adverse events that have been reported for adults in the VAERS system and how these were not predicted through the clinical trials, further highlighting how the clinical trials may have not been the most thorough with their safety testing. The authors also discuss the Pfizer biodistribution data that has been reported in rats, and highlight the limitations of this data which has been done on a very small sample, in a setting that is not physiologically similar to what is happening in humans. The authors also discuss in detail the potential adverse short and long-term effects on children. Overall this article is a must-read. 
