## Cohort Studies
Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[Arterial events, venous thromboembolism, thrombocytopenia, and bleeding after vaccination with Oxford-AstraZeneca ChAdOx1-S in Denmark and Norway: population based cohort study](https://www.bmj.com/content/373/bmj.n1114) | Pottegård, A., Lund, L.C., Karlstad, Ø., Dahl, J., Andersen, M., Hallas, J., Lidegaard, Ø., Tapia, G., Gulseth, H.L., Ruiz, P.L.D. and Watle, S.V., 2021. Arterial events, venous thromboembolism, thrombocytopenia, and bleeding after vaccination with Oxford-AstraZeneca ChAdOx1-S in Denmark and Norway: population based cohort study. _bmj_, _373_. | "A higher than expected rate of cerebral venous thrombosis was observed: standardised morbidity ratio 20.25 (8.14 to 41.73); an excess of 2.5 (0.9 to 5.2) events per 100 000 vaccinations."
[BNT162b2 vaccine breakthrough: clinical characteristics of 152 fully vaccinated hospitalized COVID-19 patients in Israel](https://www.clinicalmicrobiologyandinfection.com/article/S1198-743X(21)00367-0/fulltext) | Brosh-Nissimov, T., Orenbuch-Harroch, E., Chowers, M., Elbaz, M., Nesher, L., Stein, M., Maor, Y., Cohen, R., Hussein, K., Weinberger, M. and Zimhony, O., 2021. BNT162b2 vaccine breakthrough: clinical characteristics of 152 fully-vaccinated hospitalized COVID-19 patients in Israel. _Clinical Microbiology and Infection_. | This cohort study based in Israel examined "breakthrough" COVID-19 cases. Many of them were found to have comorbidities. "A total of 152 patients were included, accounting for half of hospitalized fully vaccinated patients in Israel. Poor outcome was noted in 38 patients and mortality rate reached 22% (34/152). Notably, the cohort was characterized by a high rate of co-morbidities predisposing to severe COVID-19, including hypertension (108; 71%), diabetes (73; 48%), congestive heart failure (41; 27%), chronic kidney and lung diseases (37; 24% each), dementia (29; 19%) and cancer (36; 24%), and only six (4%) had no co-morbidities. (...) We found that severe COVID-19 infection, associated with a high mortality rate, might develop in a minority of fully vaccinated individuals with multiple co-morbidities."

