## Issues relating to Womens' Health

### Vaccine-Related Changes to Menstrual Cycles

Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[The Spectator: The Covid vaccines may affect periods. Are we allowed to talk about this?](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/The-Covid-vaccines-may-affect-periods.-Are-we-allowed-to-talk-about-this) | *The Spectator*. Published 21 August 2021. | Mainstream news reporting on the issue of women experiencing altered menstrual cycles:<br><br>"British women have made 30,304 reports of changes to their periods after having received a Covid vaccine."<br><br>"Millions of British women have been jabbed, so 30,304 reports will be a tiny proportion: a negligible number, you might say. But it doesn’t seem negligible if you’re one of those women. I imagine many will keep a record of their cycle, perhaps in their diary or on an app, and will have noticed a change. In the US, one research survey tracking menstrual changes brought on by the Covid jabs received 140,000 responses. The two biological anthropologists conducting the research said they had expected to receive around 500 when they launched their survey."
[NIH funds studies to assess potential effects of COVID-19 vaccination on menstruation](https://www.nichd.nih.gov/newsroom/news/083021-COVID-19-vaccination-menstruation) | NIH Newsroom. Published 30 August 2021. | The issue of altered periods in women has become so notable that NIH is funding research to investigate its prevalence and the mechanisms underlying it. <br><br> "The National Institutes of Health has awarded one-year supplemental grants totaling $1.67 million to five institutions to explore potential links between COVID-19 vaccination and menstrual changes. Some women have reported experiencing irregular or missing menstrual periods, bleeding that is heavier than usual, and other menstrual changes after receiving COVID-19 vaccines. The new awards support research to determine whether such changes may be linked to COVID-19 vaccination itself and how long the changes last. Researchers also will seek to clarify the mechanisms underlying potential vaccine-related menstrual changes."
[Written comments submitted to: Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC) September 17, 2021 Meeting](https://www.regulations.gov/comment/FDA-2021-N-0965-0016) (Download PDF at bottom of page; PDF Archive: [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1HFme7TgOQxP7a46Ei4m6zqoilrIxwapw/view?usp=sharing)) | David Wiseman,1 PhD, MRPharmS., Joshua Guetzkow PhD2 , Hervé Seligmann PhD 3, Samir Saidi MBChB BSc PhD FRCOG FRANZCOG CGO4. | These are comments submitted by members of the public with relevant qualifications to the FDA's Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC) September 17, 2021 Meeting. The whole thing is worth reading, but the following excerpts are relevant to menstrual cycle changes:<br><br>Currently COVID-19 vaccines are responsible for the majority of menstrual changes that have been reported into pharmacovigilance systems:<br><br> "Querying VAERS (9/3/21) for various menstrual disorders30 we found that for reports associated with the Covid-19 vaccines **there were 7037 separate menstrual disorder related symptoms described in 4783 unique reports**. By comparison with **all other vaccines, for ALL years COMBINED we found 897 symptoms in 798 unique events**. Another analysis of VAERS reports also detected menstrual disorders.(40) A similar pattern of symptoms relating to menstrual irregularity was seen in the MHRA yellow card reporting scheme in the UK suggesting that this is not just unique to VAERS reporting.31"<br><br> They raise concerns regarding our lack of knowledge regarding the lipid nanoparticle system used to deliver the vaccine:<br><br>"One explanation for these irregularities is the biodistribution of the LNP based formula which has been shown to be preferentially distributed to, and accumulate in, the ovaries in female animal studies. The full biodistribution data for the LNP component of the Pfizer vaccine from animal studies is now in the public domain following freedom of information requests (41). The biodistribution studies show clearly that although the LNP vector is partially cleared from the injection site at 48 hours it accumulates over 100-fold in the ovaries during the same time period (p45)."<br><br>As well as limitations in the studies that were performed to assess safety in humans:<br><br>"No suitable fertility studies were subsequently performed prior to approval of the therapy to ascertain whether this could have an impact in humans and the information regarding accumulation of the product was not made public. Only one animal study addressing the fertility question was assessed prior to the issuance of the EUA which was study 20256434 (p55-56). This included only 22 rats and in each treatment group and within which one female in each group was euthanized due to total litter death. No long term studies of the pups was made as all pups were euthanized. An increased pre-implantation loss rate in rats was noted but no further studies performed."<br><br>Menstrual problems can cost society much more in the long-term and should have been taken more seriously:<br><br>""Menstrual disorders” are far too often trivialized, leaving its victims and their families to suffer. A number of these disorders lead to early hysterectomies which trigger another set of complications that can include adhesions, pain, bowel obstruction, heart disease and dementia. Will these sorts of problems be examined as part of the NIH studies?"<br><br>"NIH illustrates a number of reasons for these reported menstrual changes, including “pandemic-related stress.” But stress is not our prime suspect. Effects on the ovaries and uterus are, and we must view these reported menstrual changes in the context of unresolved questions about the safety of the vaccines on the reproductive system in general, and on pregnancy in particular."
[Characterizing menstrual bleeding changes occurring after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.11.21264863v1) | Lee KMN, Junkins EJ, Fatima UA, Cox ML, Clancy KBH (2021) Characterizing menstrual bleeding changes occurring after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. _medRxiv_ 2021.10.11.21264863. (Posted 12 October 2021). | This is a pre-print that describes a survey of 39,129 women and their experiences with altered menstrual cycles following COVID-19 vaccination. The main findings include that this is a prevalent phenomenon. In women with regular cycles, over half of them experience abnormal changes to their cycles (either heavier or lighter), see Figure 2 for details on subgroups.<br><br>Concerningly, the research also describes biological women who would not be expected to have periods, and a high prevalence of these experienced abnormal "breakthrough bleeding", including those on contraceptives (77%), women who are on hormones to transition into men (e.g. testosterone) (39%), and and post-menopausal women (66%).<br><br>The authors acknowledge the limitations in existing information surrounding this issue. This suggests that women cannot really be expected to give informed consent as we cannot say for sure that we know exactly what is going on, and how harmful or not harmful the changes in periods are over the long-term:<br><br>"Vaccine trial protocols do not typically monitor for major adverse events for more than seven days, and additional follow up communications do not inquire about menstrual cycles or bleeding. Therefore, manufacturers had no way of addressing the extent to which this observation was a coincidence or a potential side effect of the vaccines."<br><br>Given that post-menopausal women in particular will typically not experience menstruation as they are not releasing eggs anymore, this raises the question as to what mechanisms are involved. Dr Byram Bridle, Associate Professor of Viral Immunology at The University of Guelph in Canada, was interviewed on the topic of vaccine adverse effects recently (September 15, see [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2TCjYdA9goPz2nkJ0kCclY?si=aAI620oZTQ6NK4f4CHQ7Zw&dl_branch=1)), and mentioned the possibility of abnormal bleeding in women potentially being haemorrhaging of the uterus, rather than simply changes in the period. Currently this is only speculation (although there are theoretically possible mechanisms given we have seen haemorraging of the brain e.g. CVST from the COVID-19 vaccines), but only future studies and population-level data will reveal whether this is true or not. 

### Unknown Effects of Vaccines on Pregnancy
Title | Reference | Notes
--- | --- | ---
[Open Letter from Dr Byram Bridle, PhD, Associate Professor of Viral Immunology to the University of Guelph about vaccine mandates](https://www.jccf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/2021.09.17-Open-letter-to-the-president-of-the-U-of-Guelph_B.Bridle.pdf) | 17 September 2021. | Dr Byram Bridle has the relevant qualifications to be commenting on the situation. In his open letter, one section highlights a lack of safety data in pregnant females as another example of why vaccines should not be mandated.<br><br>"I would like to give another disconcerting safety-related example of why a COVID-19 vaccine mandate could be dangerous. We have pregnant individuals or those who would like to become pregnant on campus. There was a highly publicized study in the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine that formed the foundation of declaring COVID-19 vaccines safe in pregnant females (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmoa2104983). The authors of this study declared that there was no risk of increased miscarriage to vaccinated females. This study resulted in many policies being instituted to promote vaccination of this demographic, for which the bar for safety should be set extremely high. Did you know that this apparent confirmation of safety had to be rescinded recently because the authors performed an obvious mathematical error? I witnessed several of my colleagues from Canada and other countries bravely push for a review of this paper under withering negative pressures. Once the editor finally agreed to do so, the authors had no choice but to admit that made a mathematical error. Most of the world does not realize this. This admission of using an inappropriate mathematical formula can be found here: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMx210016. This means that the major rationale for declaring COVID-19 vaccines safe in pregnant females is gone! How can someone force a COVID-19 vaccine on a pregnant female when there are insufficient safety data available to justify it?"



### Ongoing studies investigating vaccine effects on fertility and pregnancy

Title | Reference | Completion Date
--- | --- | ---
[COVID-19 Vaccine Safety Evaluation in Pregnant Women and their Infants](https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/pdf/COVID19-acute-maternal-outcomes-508.pdf) (PDF Archive: [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cvIptjc_D1CHj1VZ47xA8rmSlBkZOVNB/view?usp=sharing) | *CDC*. Version 1.5. Published 29 June 2021. | March 2023
[COVID-19 Vaccine Safety, Spontaneous abortion (SAB) and Stillbirth in the Vaccine Safety Data Link](https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/pdf/VSD-COVID-Vaccine-SAB-SB-Protocol-508.pdf) (PDF Archive: [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1blhVgcLipSF9_yvyTIUKiZPy6FIF2pY0/view?usp=sharing) | *CDC*. Version 1.5. Published 28 April 2021 | April 2023 
[Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine Exposure during Pregnancy: A Non-Interventional Post-Approval Safety Study of Pregnancy and Infant Outcomes in the Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS)/MotherToBaby Pregnancy Registry](https://www.fda.gov/media/151710/download) (PDF Archive: [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1dibR6N4vhOgkniKLZGA1BvTLe4jG8ZJ1/view?usp=sharing)) | *FDA*. 23 August 2021. | June 2025

### Pharmacovigilance Data

Source | Notes
--- | --- 
[Eudravigilance](https://dap.ema.europa.eu/analytics/saw.dll?PortalPages&PortalPath=%2Fshared%2FPHV%20DAP%2F_portal%2FDAP&Action=Navigate&P0=1&P1=eq&P2=%22Line%20Listing%20Objects%22.%22Substance%20High%20Level%20Code%22&P3=1+42325700) (EU-based) | In general, women are at a higher risk of COVID-19 vaccine adverse events compared to the general population. 72.1% (339,512) reports of Pfizer-BioNTech adverse events are in females (see [this page](https://dap.ema.europa.eu/analytics/saw.dll?PortalPages&PortalPath=%2Fshared%2FPHV%20DAP%2F_portal%2FDAP&Action=Navigate&P0=1&P1=eq&P2=%22Line%20Listing%20Objects%22.%22Substance%20High%20Level%20Code%22&P3=1+42325700)), and the situation is similar in the AstraZeneca with 71.5% (276,364) reports in females (see [this page](https://dap.ema.europa.eu/analytics/saw.dll?PortalPages&PortalPath=%2Fshared%2FPHV%20DAP%2F_portal%2FDAP&Action=Navigate&P0=1&P1=eq&P2=%22Line%20Listing%20Objects%22.%22Substance%20High%20Level%20Code%22&P3=1+40995439)). The vast majority of "nervous system disorders" and "reproductive system and breast disorders" associated with both of these vaccines are also in women aged 18-64.
[VigiAccess](http://vigiaccess.org/), after searching for "COVID-19 Vaccine" | VigiAccess is a worldwide pharmacovigilance system maintained by the WHO. The age group associated with the highest risk of adverse events across all COVID-19 vaccines are individuals aged 18-44 years (39% of all adverse events). Females have a higher incidence of adverse effects (69%) across all COVID-19 vaccines than males, similar to what is seen in the European data from Eudravigilance, suggesting that this trend appears to hold more generally. Out of the 85,797 reports of reproductive system and breast disorders that have been reported, the majority of these represent menstrual disorders, including vaginal haemorrhaging. Notably, 2,057 reports are postmenopausal haemorrhage, indicating that these changes to womens' menstrual cycles may go beyond just cycle changes and may affect the shedding or haemorrhaging of the uterus itsel. Haemorrhaging of the uterus mediated by spike protein has also been brought up as a possible concern by Dr Byram Bridle, Associate Professor of Immunology at the University of Guelph (see [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2TCjYdA9goPz2nkJ0kCclY?si=aAI620oZTQ6NK4f4CHQ7Zw&dl_branch=1&nd=1) interview from 15 September). As the aforementioned long-term studies, in addition to the NIH-funded studies on menstrual changes are years away from completion, forcing young women of childbearing age to accept the risks of these vaccines undermines the whole concept of informed consent.
